# UNIVERSITY OF CANTERBURY## Te Whare Wānanga o Waitaha### CUAP Proposal-New Qualification/Subject   2012 #### Proposal Description**Purpose of the proposal**To introduce “Digital Humanities” as a subject in the Bachelor of Arts with Honours degree.**Justification**The Digital Humanities Programme will provide a high-profile, attractive, and professionalizing component to the University’s humanities courses. The programme will position the College of Arts and School of Humanities as cutting-edge, innovative assets to the New Zealand and international academic communities. It is important to do this now, while the University has the appropriate expertise and the momentum gained by the development of the UC CEISMIC Canterbury Earthquake Digital Archive. The introduction of an innovative new programme aligns to the University’s goal of protecting and nurturing the arts and humanities and working with them to create connections both inside and outside the University. It aligns to goals outlined in the 2011 College of Arts Operational Plan related to the development of new postgraduate pathways, value added academic experiences, student recognition and outreach, overseas partnerships, and strategic integration with the broader University.Digital Humanities centres, programmes and departments are being established around the world and now number over 100. Five examples that indicate the breadth of interest in the field include: the Department of Digital Humanities at King’s College London; the Centre for Digital Humanities at University College London; The Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities at the University of Maryland; the Centre for History and New Media at George Mason University; and the Center for Digital Humanities at UCLA. UC digital humanities staff already have good contacts at several of these locations, and there is considerable scope for collaboration in research, teaching and general collegial interaction. The 2011 Modern Language Association (MLA) included 44 sessions on Digital Humanities topics, and the 2012 conference had in excess of 50, so we should expect opportunities for collaboration to increase. The University of Canterbury programme will be the first of its kind in New Zealand and Australia, and a global leader in certain professionalising aspects. It will advance the discipline in fundamental ways, by integrating the humanities tradition with contemporary digital tools, methods and culture. The practical and vocational orientation of the Programme will create tangible new pathways into the workplace for students, and opportunities for staff to involve themselves with world-leading research projects. By increasing the capability of humanities staff and students with digital tools and methods, and proactively encouraging communication and collaboration across disciplinary boundaries, the Programme will help ensure the future of Humanities as a discipline in the twenty-first century. In addition to connections with the international digital humanities community, positive relationships (and in many cases joint projects) have already been developed with UC Computer Science and Software Engineering, the HIT Lab NZ, NZi3, the National eScience Infrastructure (NeSI), Victoria University Information Management, and Lincoln University Applied Computing, indicating that digital humanities offers excellent opportunities for inter-disciplinary collaboration.The Digital Humanities Programme will challenge students to learn new skills and engage in professionalizing activities, concentrate digital expertise in the new Department of English, Cinema and Digital Humanities, and connect the School of Humanities with researchers across the university and world.The Programme will reflect the strategic requirement for the University, College of Arts and School of Humanities to forge innovative new areas of teaching and research to offset the financial, managerial and cultural challenges posed by the recent earthquakes. At the same time as offering immediate tactical benefits, by indicating the University is eager to foster innovation as a means of resolving these issues, the programme will seed new teaching and research pathways with long-term prospects. The development of relationships forged with the creative industry and national cultural heritage agencies through the UC CEISMIC Digital Archive will add another layer to these opportunities. Opportunities to organise internships and work experience opportunities with these organisations have already been taken, and could be of lasting benefit.Digital Humanities engages with and is representative of all Humanities disciplines, and thus embodies the core critical, analytical and methodological traditions of those disciplines. For this reason a qualification in Digital Humanities will fulfil, as its over-riding aim, the existing requirements of those disciplines. In addition, the qualification will provide a broad overview of knowledge requirements in related areas such as project management, software development, business analysis and communications. Efforts are underway to open pathways into those related knowledge areas for appropriate students, and from those areas into Digital Humanities. Digital Humanities has a strong practical orientation, which makes it perfectly suited to the development of internship and work experience components. The Programme will focus on professionalizing students to ensure they are ‘workforce ready’. Graduates would be well suited to careers in research, relationship management, digital library science, business analysis, teaching, digital archiving, project management, and the creative and cultural heritage sectors. They would be particularly suited to policy analysis positions related to technology and culture, and any position that requires communication across technical and non-technical teams. Until full digital humanities Masters and Ph.D. courses are in place, students wishing to proceed to Masters and doctoral studies will be encouraged to focus on a ‘primary’ discipline (English, History, Classics, Philosophy etc), with co-supervision in digital humanities.Digital Humanities will complement existing courses in Humanities disciplines across universities in New Zealand, Australia and the Pacific. The qualification will be developed at a post-graduate level, with relevant existing UC School of Humanities courses acting as feeders into the programme where appropriate. The resulting Programme will become a possible destination for all New Zealand, Australasian and Pacific students interested in augmenting their Humanities degrees with a digital component. Student numbers are difficult to predict, but rollout of the qualification will be scaled in relation to demand and senior staff are confident that it will be self-sustaining.Digital Humanities is a growing teaching and research area worldwide. As a leader in the field, the UC Digital Humanities Programme can expect opportunities to generate new research, from pedagogical, technical and traditional humanistic perspectives. The continued extension of the scholarly and cultural environment into the digital world presents significant opportunities for new research now and into the future. Overseas experience , moreover, points to demand far out-stripping demand for graduates with skills in digital humanities. This is a significant reversal for the humanities as a whole and offers students a range of opportunities.Digital Humanities has a strong orientation towards community engagement and provides excellent opportunities for the incorporation of Māori and Treaty of Waitangi obligations into the curriculum, in terms of both research and teaching. An expectation has already been set in the international digital humanities community that the New Zealand ‘node’ will actively reflect Māori and Pacific cultures. By increasing technological literacy of Māori graduates, the programme can be expected to contribute to the social and economic development of Māori. Programme staff will be available to Māori staff and students for co-supervision on digital projects and advice on digital humanities-related topics.The proposal fits the research and teaching specifications of Senior Lecturer in Digital Humanities, Dr. James Smithies (who has a doctorate in History along with 5 years’ experience in the IT industry as a technical writer, senior business analyst, and project manager) and Associate Professor of English Paul Millar (currently course convener for an existing digital humanities course). Discussions are underway with HIT Lab NZ, and UC Computer Science and Software Engineering about providing pathways both from and to Digital Humanities, and providing expertise to ensure pedagogical standards are met. It seems likely that programming sections of the programme will be taught by post-graduates or staff from these parts of the university (although staff from the digital humanities programme would be capable of doing so if resource is not available). Library Science / Information Management and artefact-based aspects to the programme are being explored with the Macmillan Brown Library, and audio-visual components could be added in conjunction with the UC CEISMIC digital archive, and colleagues in the Cinema programme. Relationships developed through the UC CEISMIC Digital Archive Programme, with the National Library, Archives New Zealand, and Ministry for Culture and Heritage, will be further developed to support the UC digital humanities programme. Guest lecturers will be sought, where appropriate, from across the University and digital cultural-heritage sector.**Acceptability**Pedagogy and curriculum development are key discussion points across the international digital humanities community. In 2012 Dr. James Smithies participated in a panel discussion on the topic at the Australasian Association for Digital Humanities conference at the Australian National University (ANU), involving staff from King’s College, Brown University, and the Victorian eResearch Strategic Initiative (VeRSI) . He presented a paper, ‘Pacific DH: Building Pedagogy in Aotearoa / New Zealand’ at the same conference. Smithies presented another paper, ‘Introduction to Digital Humanities’ to the UC School of Humanities at a regular History Department seminar; this paper outlined the proposed deployment model for the Programme in addition to introducing Digital Humanities as a field of teaching and research.*University of Canterbury Notifications*:- The proposal has been emailed to all CoA Heads of School.- The proposal has been emailed to the Dean of Postgraduate Studies.- The proposal has been emailed to the CoA Teaching and Learning Committee.- The proposal has been emailed to Assoc. Prof. Tim Bell, Deputy Head of Department, Computer Science and Software Engineering Department.- The proposal has been emailed to Prof. Phil Bones, Head of Department, Electrical and Computer Engineering.- The proposal has been emailed to Prof. Mark Billinghurst, Director, Hit Lab NZ.- The proposal has been emailed to Jill Durney, Manager, Macmillan Brown Library.- The proposal has been emailed to Dr. Linda Jean Kenix, School of Social and Political Sciences.*New Zealand Notifications*:- The proposal has been emailed to Stuart Charters, Senior Lecturer, Applied Computing, Lincoln University.- The proposal has been emailed to Vicky Compton, Principal Lecturer / Researcher in Postgraduate Studies and Research (Faculty of Education, University of Auckland).- The proposal has been emailed to Nick Jones, Co-Director of the New Zealand eScience Infrastructure (NeSI).- The proposal has been emailed to Sydney Shep, Senior Lecturer, School of Information Management, Victoria University of Wellington.*International Notifications*:- The proposal has been emailed to Katharine Bode, Head and Senior Lecturer, Literary and Textual Studies, Digital Humanities Hub, Australian National University.- The proposal has been emailed to Julia Flanders, Director, Women’s Writing Project and Associate Director for Textbase Development, Brown University.- The proposal has been emailed to Alan Liu, Chair and Professor in the English Department at the University of California, Santa Barbara.- The proposal has been emailed to Harold Short, Professor of Humanities Computing, King’s College London.- The proposal has been emailed to John Unsworth, Vice Provost for Library and Technology Services and Chief Information Officer, Brandeis University.The feedback received is attached to the end of the proposal.**Goals of the programme**The proposal is to introduce a BA (Hons) programme comprising three core courses ( DIGI 401 Introduction to Digital Humanities, DIGI 402 The Digital Modern: Humanities and New Media, and DIGI 480 Research Essay).  Additional courses (Directed Reading and Writing, and Applied Digital Humanities) will be offered as the programme is rolled out. Conversations are underway with English and History about the introduction of Digital Literary Studies and Digital History courses in subsequent years. During development of the curriculum College of Arts staff will be encouraged to work with the Digital Humanities Programme to augment their undergraduate courses with digital components and co-supervise postgraduate work, thus creating pathways to Digital Humanities across the College and providing all College programmes with the opportunity to benefit from student interest in Digital Humanities. Students will be encouraged to take COSC 110: Working in a Digital World, COSC 121: Introduction to Computer Programming, and INFO 125: Introduction to Programming with Databases, to increase their technical skills and create pathways across UC. The programme will comprise a cohesive set of Honours level courses, designed to offer Humanities graduates the opportunity to build on the traditional skills they have gained over the course of their undergraduate studies, with theoretical as well as applied components. Students will normally be expected to have completed the requirements for an undergraduate degree in any discipline, with a B average at 300 level. Students without a background in Arts, Social Science or Education will be encouraged to consult with the Head of Programme before enrolling to ensure an adequate course of work can be supplied for them. As per University guidelines, students will be allowed to take up to two courses in other Honours programmes. Co-supervision of 480 research essays with neighbouring disciplines (Arts, Social Science, Fine Arts, Business and Economics) will be especially encouraged. Efforts are already underway to develop undergraduate pathways in digital humanities using appropriate existing undergraduate courses, which are either well suited to developing digital components, or already providing them. Undergraduate students can find out about these courses on http://dh.canterbury.ac.nz. They include undergraduate courses in English, History, Computer Science, Service Learning and Arts Internship. More courses will be identified across the College of Arts and the broader university as the programme develops.The proposed courses for the first year of the programme are:*DIGI 401 Introduction to Digital Humanities*- This course will be taught by Dr. James Smithies, and lay the theoretical and methodological foundation for an Honours degree in Digital Humanities. Students will be provided with a history of humanities computing, and its development through the ‘computational turn’ into Digital Humanities over the last decade. They will be challenged to consider what it means to be a digital humanist, and attend seminars in technological determinism, systems theory, Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and data visualization, TEI (The Humanities Text Encoding Initiative), text analysis and the nature of digital texts, algorithmic criticism and distant reading, open source and open access movements, digital forensics , crowd-sourcing, and materiality. Assessment will include participation in tutorials on project management and software development, and practical laboratories involving basic programming and database design. Students will produce two 3500 word essays, and be assessed on their participation in 4 applied laboratories on elementary programming and database design (20%). A range of other types of assessment including blog posts, forums, essays, response papers, and in-class tests may also be used. The goal is to offer students a broad education in digital humanities, from theory to elementary programming and system design.*DIGI 402 The Digital Modern: Humanities and New Media*- This course will be taught by Dr. James Smithies, and be designed to complement the theoretical and practical knowledge students gain in Introduction to Digital Humanities. It will run in the semester following Introduction to foster continuity of the learning experience. The focus will be less on the theoretical and practical components of Digital Humanities, and more on the development of critical skills specific to the digital world. Rather than being a straight-forward application of critical theory to new media, the course will encourage a critical assessment of new media based on cognizance of its engineered nature and relationship to society. Topics will include cybernetics, the ethics of information systems, closed versus open computing systems, the internet and human ethics, blogging, neo-liberalism and new media, hyper-rationalization and IT, the digital avant-garde, software studies, video games, digital hyper-reality and the panopticon, social media and the ‘Twitter revolutions’, hypertext literature, and the nature of Wikipedia. Students will be expected to produce two 3500 word essays. A range of other types of assessment including blog posts, forums, essays, response papers, and in-class tests will also be used. The course will consider continuity within the humanities tradition as well as change, and the degree to which the digital world enables or threatens the Humanities.*DIGI 480 Digital Humanities Research Essay*- The Digital Humanities Research essay will provide an opportunity for students to undertake an in-depth study of areas of special interest under the supervision of a staff member. Supervision will be provided by either Dr. James Smithies or Assoc. Prof. Paul Millar. Assessment will be by 10,000 word essay.The proposed additional courses for subsequent years of the programme are:*DIGI 403 Digital Literary Studies*- Digital Literary Studies will be taught by Assoc. Prof. Paul Millar and Dr. Chris Thomson. It will focus on what it means to be the first generation to create, disseminate and critique literature in the digital age. In analysing the shift towards digitisation we will pay particular attention to the nature of literary and critical digital texts and the impact of these new forms on reading and criticism. A key element of the course will be the study of the technical foundations for the production of digital texts, which will provide students with an opportunity to discover how the encoding of texts affects critical responses and the process of interpretation. Topics covered will include: digital tools for textual analysis; data modelling; visualisation as an analytical tool; text encoding with TEI (The Humanities Text Encoding Initiative); algorithmic criticism; distant reading; crowd-sourced editions, translations and scholarship; the digital rescue of forgotten print books; computer-assisted stylistic analysis; born-digital texts; and the digital text and the future of publishing. This course will be internally assessed using a range of types of assessment including blog posts, forums, essays, response papers, and in-class tests. A practical text-encoding project will be a key element of assessment. This course will be double-coded with English.*DIGI 404 Applied Digital Humanities*- Students with adequate technical skills can request acceptance to the Applied Digital Humanities course, taught by Dr. James Smithies. This will involve the design, development and deployment of a digital tool or website, along with an essay, website or series of blog posts related to its design and development. The development component will count for 40% of the final grade and the additional outputs should include sections on Project Methodology, Design, and Development. Students will be required to prove their technical ability by reference to a digital portfolio (which could include websites, blogs, software scripts etc) before acceptance. Cross-supervision will be available for students with backgrounds in computer science, who will need to demonstrate appropriate levels of written English.*DIGI 405 Digital Humanities Directed Reading and Writing*- This course provides an opportunity for students to study areas of interest not otherwise available as 400-level courses.  Supervision will be provided by either Dr. James Smithies or Assoc. Prof. Paul Millar. Students work independently under the direction of a staff member. They are required to read prescribed primary and secondary materials, to undertake assigned research tasks, and to produce two or more essays or other written exercises (with a total length of about 10,000 words) on specified dates.  Directed Reading and Writing differs from the Research Essay in that it focuses on an area or field of study rather than a specific topic and the required work more closely resembles what is expected for a taught course. **Graduate Profile**Digital Humanities graduates will fill a gap produced after the ‘internet boom’ of the 1990s, when Humanities degrees began to get out of step with labour market requirements for graduates that are:- capable of producing clear, concise analyses of technologically-oriented topics;- conversant with a range of common digital tools used in small, medium and large organisations;- aware of the constraints imposed by the technical requirements of information systems;- aware of common project management and software development methodologies;- capable of challenging the status-quo, as well as working comfortably within it;- capable of critically analysing digital content to assess its quality and social value;- comfortable interacting with a range of technical and non-technical people, and aiding communication between those people;- aware of the difference between theoretical and applied knowledge, and comfortable with both;- aware of the position of digital culture in society, and the role of new media.Graduates will have been actively supported in their efforts to professionalize and move into the job market, making them highly attractive to employers in need to ‘workforce ready’ staff.**Outcome Statement**Digital Humanities graduates have a blend of traditional humanities-related skills and 21st Century applied ones. They have an understanding of the moral and ethical issues surrounding technologies and the digital world, the ability to write clear, concise prose, and an understanding of the technical constraints imposed by information systems. This makes them well suited to work in all new media and digital industries, but especially ones requiring a blend of analytical and technical skills. Graduates would be suitable for work in research, relationship management, business analysis, digital archiving, project management, and the creative and cultural heritage sectors. They are particularly suited to policy analysis positions related to technology and culture, and any position that requires communication across technical and non-technical teams.#### Programme Overview**See associated course outlines**.*Proposed teaching/delivery methods*The programme will have a range of teaching methods including lectures, seminars, tutorials and practical laboratories. *Assessment procedures*Course assessment will be undertaken by Digital Humanities continuing staff (Dr. James Smithies and Assoc. Prof. Paul Millar), in collaboration with neighbouring disciplines where necessary. Traditional essays will be used to build and assess students’ critical, analytical and written skills. Additional assessment will use a broad range of assessment techniques, including blog posts, Wikipedia entries, forums, essays, response papers, and in-class tests. Students with the requisite skills will be able to apply to produce practical digital projects (tools and websites) for assessment as a proportion of the grade that will never exceed half of their total grade.*Predicted student numbers/EFTS*Numbers are based on interest in a single existing Digital Humanities course (ENGL 419: Scholarly Editing) and Digital Humanities internships in ARTS 395: Arts Internship. Initial numbers are set at the University minimum for Honours courses. It is expected that 2 years grace period will be given for lower numbers in order to establish the programme.2013: 20.00 EFTS2014: 25.00 EFTS2015: 30.00 EFTS*Resources*No additional staff are expected to be needed. The programme has a full-time continuing Senior Lecturer in Digital Humanities (James Smithies) and a 0.25 Associate Professor (Paul Millar). The manager of the UC CEISMIC Programme Office, Chris Thomson, also has considerable experience with Digital Humanities and the programme plans to provide staffing support for him that would enable him to teach into the programme on a fixed term basis if necessary. Guest lecturers will be sought from cognate disciplines including (but not limited to) Geography, Education and Fine Arts. The HITLab and Computer Science and Engineering have already indicated a willingness to discuss lecturing support.  If required by demand, hiring of additional permanent teaching and support staff will be accelerated.The UC CEISMIC Digital Archive Programme Office, already established with 6 dual-boot Apple – Windows computers, will be used for laboratories. Normal lecture and tutorial rooms will be used for other teaching.An existing Wordpress server, supported at the operating level by ICTS and at the application level by the Digital Humanities Programme, will be used to provide a blogging platform if necessary, although students are likely to be required to use existing online services such as Wordpress.com.Elizabeth Cooke, from UC Library has been consulted about textbook and serial requirements (see attached).Interest has been received from a variety of organisations regarding Digital Humanities internship and work experience placements. Possible locations include the Ministry of Health, Ministry for Culture and Heritage, Christchurch City Libraries, Canterbury Museum, Archives NZ, CWA Media and NV Interactive. The UC CEISMIC Digital Archive will also offer opportunities. These opportunities will continue to be explored. UC has particular strengths in the history and philosophy of computing, applied computing, high performance computing, and augmented reality. A Summer of eResearch (SoER) scholarship, in conjunction with the University of Auckland and National eScience Infrastructure (NeSI) was successfully completed in 2011 -2012, and this relationship is expected to continue. Relationships with national cultural heritage organisations (Christchurch City Libraries, the Canterbury Museum, the Ministry for Culture and Heritage, the National Library, New Zealand Film Archive, NZ on Screen, NZ Historic Places Trust, and Te Papa) are likely to offer opportunities for internships and work experiences for students, as will relationships with the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA), Environment Canterbury (ECAN) and various others. UC students have already been placed in contract roles at the Ministry of Health (Wellington) and the Royal Earthquake Commission (Christchurch), and 8 interns have worked in organisations across Christchurch as part of ARTS 395.  Working relationships also exist with Lincoln University Applied Computing and Victoria University of Wellington Information Management. Given this has been achieved in only 9 months from James Smithies being hired as Senior Lecturer in Digital Humanities, the opportunity clearly exists to leverage the digital humanities programme for a variety of professionalizing, outreach and collaborative functions.*Plans for monitoring programme quality*- The programme will conduct an internal review of all course offerings and results annually, focussing on learning outcomes.- Students will evaluate all classes, teaching and supervision through the STU survey. They may also submit their own recommendations and responses through the Class Rep or directly to teaching staff at regular staff / student Liaison meetings.- Peer review of course offerings and student work by fully qualified External Moderators from humanities and (where appropriate) computer science programmes.- Mentoring: regular meetings with the Head of the Department of English, Cinema and Digital Humanities and senior academics in the School of Humanities.- Full programme review in 3 years.- Graduating year review.- 5 yearly programme review.*Duration of the Qualification*Minimum number of points to complete the qualification: 120Vacation/recess weeks: 6Work experience/placement hours per week: 0Tuition/teaching (full-time equivalent) weeks (including exam and study weeks): 30Teaching hours per week: 3 hours per week per course per semester (not applicable to Research Essay)Self-directed learning hours per week: 34-37*Calendar Form*New Qualification Regulations*UC Calendar 2012 Page 11*Add under the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences: Digital Humanities.Page 225 after Cultural Studies addDigital Humanities.DIGI 480 and at least 1 of either DIGI 401 or 402. Up to two courses selected from other Honours-level courses can also be taken. P: Candidates will normally be expected to have completed the requirements for an undergraduate degree in any discipline, with a B average at 300 level.Page 434 *Course Catalogue entry*Digital Studies*DIGI 401  Introduction to Digital Humanities*This course provides a foundation in Digital Humanities, providing students with core historical, methodological, theoretical and applied skills. The course introduces Digital Humanities as a field, explaining its purpose and the reasons for its recent rise to prominence internationally. Students are then offered overviews of a broad range of Digital Humanities practices and techniques, and instruction in elementary programming. The emphasis is on establishing digital skills that students can take into other courses of study and their future workplaces, blending the humanities tradition with 21st century technologies.*DIGI 402  The Digital Modern: Humanities and New Media*This courses challenges students to apply humanistic methods to the burgeoning field of New Media and digital technologies. It explains the underlying technologies and business processes that power contemporary digital culture, and provides introductory overviews of subjects as varied as cybernetics, network theory, digital hyper-reality, social media, knowledge economies, piracy and the ethics of closed and open systems. While placing an emphasis on the engineered nature of new media, the course doesn't teach programming, instead focusing on history, criticism and critique.*DIGI 480 Digital Humanities Research Essay* Students taking Digital Humanities Research Essay produce a single 10,000 word essay. The course requires scholarly research, engagement with broader humanities discourse(s), and high bibliographic standards. Focus is on the development of critical and analytical skills that will enable students to move on to Masters and Doctoral studies. Students will be taught how to write about technical subjects in an informed manner, and produce critiques of new media and digital culture. Co-supervision will be organised where appropriate. When available, students will be encouraged to pursue internship and work experience opportunities relevant to their area of study after completion.